Update HTTP_SPEC.md (#283)
filecoin-project/lassie: docs/HTTP_SPEC.md

- [HTTP Response](#http-response)
    - [Response Status Codes](#response-status-codes)
        - [`200` OK](#200-ok)
        - [`400` Bad Request](#400-bad-request)
        - [`404` Not Found](#404-not-found)
        - [`405` Method Not Allowed](#405-method-not-allowed)
        - [`500` Internal Server Error](#500-internal-server-error)
        - [`504` Gateway Timeout](#504-gateway-timeout)
    - [Response Headers](#response-headers)
        - [`Accept-Ranges` (response header)](#accept-ranges-response-header)
        - [`Cache-Control` (response header)](#cache-control-response-header)
        - [`Content-Disposition` (response header)](#content-disposition-response-header)
        - [`Content-Type` (response header)](#content-type-response-header)
        - [`Etag` (response header)](#etag-response-header)
        - [`X-Content-Type-Options` (response header)](#x-content-type-options-response-header)
        - [`X-Ipfs-Path` (response header)](#x-ipfs-path-response-header)
        - [`X-Trace-Id` (response header)](#x-trace-id-response-header)
    - [Response Payload](#response-payload)

# HTTP API

> Same as [Trustless Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/#http-api), but without the HEAD requests and `/ipni/` namespace support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same as [Trustless Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/#http-api), but without the HEAD requests and `/ipns/` namespace support.
```

Author: Ah, good catch. So many IP acronyms.

- `cid`: _REQUIRED_. A valid string representation of the root CID of the DAG being requested.

- `path`: _OPTIONAL_. A valid IPLD path to traverse within the DAG to the final content.

    The path must begin with a `/`, and must describe a valid path within the DAG. The path will be resolved as a [UnixFS](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/main/UNIXFS.md) path where the encountered path segments are within valid UnixFS blocks and can be read as named links. Where the blocks do not describe valid UnixFS data, the path segment(s) will be interpreted as describing plain IPLD nodes to traverse.
    
    All blocks from the root `cid` to the final content via the provided path will be returned, allowing for a verifiable CAR. The entire DAG will also be returned from the point where the path terminates. This behavior can be modified with the `depthType` query parameter.

    Example:
    - `/ipfs/bafy...foo/bar/baz`, where `bafy...foo` is the CID and `/bar/baz` is a path.  

- `params`: _OPTIONAL_. Query parameters that adjust response behavior. See [HTTP Query Parameters](#request-query-parameters) for more information.

# HTTP Request

> Same as [Trustless Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/#http-request), but only supporting a single media type in the Accept header and a couple media type parameters from an open proposal [IPIP-412](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/412).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same as [Trustless Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/#http-request), but only supporting a single media type in the Accept header and some additional media type parameters from an open proposal [IPIP-412](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/412).
```

### `Accept` (request header)

Same as [Trustless Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/#accept-request-header), but _SHALL NOT_ accept any other media types specified other than `application/vnd.ipld.car`.

Used to specify the response content type. _OPTIONAL_ only if a `format` query parameter is provided, otherwise this header is _REQUIRED_.

If provided, the value MUST explicitly or implicitly include the following media type:
- `application/vnd.ipld.car`

#### `version` (CAR content type parameter)

See [application/vnd.ipld.car](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.car).

_OPTIONAL_. `version=1`. Defaults to `1`.

Used to specify the version of the CAR media type to respond with. Values other than `1` will respond with a 400 status code.

- `1`: Version 1 of the CAR media type.

Example:
- `application/vnd.ipld.car;version=1;` requests version 1 of the CAR media type

#### `dups` (CAR content type parameter)

Specified in [IPIP-412](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/746cb5206e2346f8e4a37219898a735a498c3186/src/ipips/ipip-0412.md#order-car-content-type-parameter).

_OPTIONAL_. `dups=(y|n)`. Defaults to `y`. 

> Used to specify whether or not the response will include duplicate blocks in the CAR response. Unspecified values will respond with a 400 status code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used to specify whether or not the response may include duplicate blocks in the CAR response where they exist within the DAG. Unspecified values will respond with a 400 status code.
```

> - `y`: Include duplicate blocks in the response
> - `n`: Does not include duplicate blocks in the response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `y`: Include duplicate blocks in the response where they are encountered in a depth-first traversal of the DAG
- `n`: Strictly do not include duplicate blocks in the response
```

Examples:
- `application/vnd.ipld.car;dups=y;` includes duplicate blocks
- `application/vnd.ipld.car;dups=n;` does not include duplicate blocks

#### `order` (CAR content type parameter)

Specified in [IPIP-412](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/blob/746cb5206e2346f8e4a37219898a735a498c3186/src/ipips/ipip-0412.md#order-car-content-type-parameter), but Lassie will only ever produce a `dfs` ordered CAR response.

> _OPTIONAL_. `order=(dfs|unk)`. Defaults to `unk`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_OPTIONAL_. `order=(dfs|unk)`. Defaults to `dfs`.
```

:shrug: doesn't matter, but from as user perspective (not necessarily a code perspective) it does default to dfs, and we just happen to make unk look like dfs too

Author: I struggled with this one a bit. The IPIP states it defaults to `unk`, which is why I explicitly stated in the description that it will only ever produce a `dfs` ordered CAR response. You're right though that it doesn't really matter for us, which is why I left it as `unk` to stick to the same spec. I could see how that might be confusing though.

Used to specify preference for a specific block order in the CAR response. Unspecified values will respond with a 400 status code.

> - `dfs`: [Depth-First Search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) order, enables streaming responses with minimal memory usage. 
> - `unk`: Unknown order. Although this is the default, Lassie will still produce a depth first search regardless.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dfs`: [Depth-First Search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search) order.
- `unk`: Unknown order. Although this is the default, Lassie will still produce a depth first search regardless.

Depth-first traversal enables efficient incremental verifiability of content, as the consume of the DAG can execute the same traversal on the data as it is received, verifying the content is exactly what is expected and rejecting the content as soon as a discrepancy occurs rather than waiting to consume the entire DAG before being able to reconstruct the ordered content.

When combined with `dups=y`, a depth-first traversal enables streaming responses, obviating the need to cache blocks in case they re-appear later in a traversal.

```

Hopefully that's not too wordful but I wanted to add the benefits of dfs and clear up that dfs-alone doesn't give you efficient streaming.

Examples:
- `application/vnd.ipld.car;order=dfs;` will respond with a depth-first search ordered CAR
- `application/vnd.ipld.car;order=unk;` will respond with a depth-first search ordered CAR
    
### `X-Request-Id` (request header)

> _OPTIONAL_. Used to provide a unique request value that can be correlated with a unique retrieval ID in the logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_OPTIONAL_. Used to provide a unique request value that can be correlated with a unique retrieval ID in logs and in downstream requests. When not present a UUIDv4 is generated for the request. Where a retrieval is attempted from a compatible HTTP Trustless Gateway candidate, this parameter is passed on, potentially creating a request traceability chain.
```

_OPTIONAL_. Used to specify the response content type.

This is a URL-friendly alternative to providing an [`Accept`](#accept-request-header) header. _OPTIONAL_ only if an `Accept` header value is provided, otherwise this parameter is _REQUIRED_. Unlike the [`Accept`](#accept-request-header), there is no way to specify media type parameter values. Default media type parameter values will be applied.

If provided, the value _MUST_ be `car`. Any other value will respond with a 400 status code.

Example:
- `format=car` &rarr; `Accept: application/vnd.ipld.car`

### `dag-scope` (request query parameter)

Specified in [IPIP-402](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/402).

_OPTIONAL_. `dag-scope=(block|entity|all)`. Defaults to `all`.

Describes the shape of the DAG fetched at the terminus of the specified path whose blocks are included in the returned CAR file after the blocks required to traverse path segments. Unspecified values will respond with a 400 status code.

- `block`: Only the root block at the end of the path is returned after blocks required to verify the specified path segments.

> - `entity`: Returns only the content at the termination of the `{cid}[/path]` specifier, as well as all blocks from the `cid` to the `path` terminus where a `path` is provided. If the content is found to be UnixFS data, the entire UnixFS entity will be included. i.e. if `{cid}[/path]` terminates at a sharded UnixFS file, or a sharded UnixFS directory, the blocks required to reconsititute the entire file, or directory will be included. If the termination is a UnixFS sharded directory, only the full directory will be included, not the full DAG of the directory's contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `entity`: Returns only the content at the termination of the `{cid}[/path]` specifier, as well as all blocks from the `cid` to the `path` terminus where a `path` is provided. If the content is found to be UnixFS data, the entire UnixFS entity will be included. i.e. if `{cid}[/path]` terminates at a sharded UnixFS file, the blocks required to reconsititute the entire file will be included. If the termination is a UnixFS sharded directory, only the full directory structure itself will be included, not the full DAG of the directory's contents.
```

- `all`: Transmit the entire contiguous DAG that begins at the end of the path query, after blocks required to verify path segments.

> When present, the `Etag` response header must include a unique prefix based on the passed scope type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When present, the `Etag` response header will include a unique prefix based on the passed scope type.
```

aye, but it doesn't, and we need to fix this, along with the `path` and `dupes` somehow; I think maybe we should just remove this bit entirely until we've address this, it's a bit of a problem as it is now because we're potentially giving the same Etag for different responses.

https://github.com/ipfs/boxo/pull/303/commits/f61f95481041406df46a1781b1daab34b6605650#r1213918777

Reviewer: https://github.com/filecoin-project/lassie/pull/285

Examples:
- `dag-scope=block` 
- `dag-scope=entity`
- `dag-scope=all`

> ### `protocols` (request query parameter)

Reviewer: I think for each of these it might be beneficial to add a clarification that this isn't part of a trustless or path gateway spec, these are lassie-specific—either as a parent header for the section, or as a note in each one.

Author: I can definitely call that out specifically. I was thinking if I called out which parameters _were_ taken from the other specs then the parameters that didn't have that noted would mean it was Lassie specific. Better to be explicit though than to assume others reading it will reach the same conclusion.

> _OPTIONAL_. `protocols=[...bitswap|graphsync|http]`. Defaults to any valid protocol returned by IPNI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_OPTIONAL_. `protocols=[...bitswap|graphsync|http]`. Defaults to any valid protocol returned by [IPNI](https://github.com/ipni/specs/blob/main/IPNI.md).
```

Reviewer: you may want to look at consistency for the one-of-many options - `protocols=[.|.|.]` is different from `dupes=(y|n)`. `[]` I think is more standard way, `()` is a bit regexy.

Reviewer: also not sure about how to represent this as `,`, maybe that's what you're trying to do with `...`? could be something more posixy like:

> `protocols=a[,b,[c...]]]` Where protocols `a`, `b`, `c` are any combination of `bitswap`, `graphsync` and `http`.

but that gets kind of messy!

Author: I saw that `()` was used in the ipfs specs so I just continued using it. I wanted to use `[]` to signify a list, but wasn't sure how to show that it should be comma delimited.

Actually now that I'm thinking about this, I think the following is a lot clearer:
```
protocols=[bitswap,graphsync,http]
```

Author: Went back and double checked, the only example in the Path Gateway where an example is shown, it's using `<>`. I found the example in one of the IPIPs. I'd also be down for using `<>`, but I like the `[]`.

Used to specify the retrieval protocols to use, delimited by a comma. Unrecognized protocols will respond with a 400 status code.

### `providers` (request query parameter)

_OPTIONAL_. `providers=[...peer-id]`. Defaults to any providers returned by IPNI.

> Used to specify the providers to retrieve from, delimited by a comma, via their peer IDs. Invalid provider peer IDs will respond with a 400 status code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used to specify the providers to retrieve from, delimited by a comma, via their peer [multiaddr](https://github.com/multiformats/multiaddr), including peer ID. Invalid provider multiaddrs will respond with a 400 status code. 
```

Author: Now that I'm thinking about example syntax for values that should be comma delimited lists, I think the example for this should read:
```
providers=[peerId1,peerId2,...]
```

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#accept-ranges-response-header), but only ever returns with `none` as range requests are not currently supported.

### `Cache-Control` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#cache-control-response-header), but only ever returns `immutable` since this API only supports the `/ipfs/` namespace.

- `Cache-Control: public, max-age=29030400, immutable`

### `Content-Disposition` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#content-disposition-response-header), but only ever returns as an `attachment`, using the given `filename` query parameter if provided, or if no `filename` query parameter is provided, uses the requested CID with a `.car` extension.

- `Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=bafy...foo.car`

### `Content-Type` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#content-type-response-header), but only ever returns the CAR content type.

- `Content-Type: application/vnd.ipld.car; version=1`

### `Etag` (response header)

> Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#etag-response-header).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#etag-response-header).
```

see above

Returns with the requested CID with a CAR format suffix.

- `Etag: bafy...foo.car`

### `X-Content-Type-Options` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#x-content-type-options-response-header), but only ever returns `nosniff`.

- `X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff`

### `X-Ipfs-Path` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#x-ipfs-path-response-header).

- `X-Ipfs-Path: /ipfs/bafy...foo`

### `X-Trace-Id` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#x-trace-id-response-header).

Returns the given `X-Request-Id` header value if provided, otherwise returns an ID that uniquely identifies the retrieval request.

## Response Payload

> Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#response-payload), but only ever returns an arbitrary DAG as a verifiable CAR file or a stream, see [application/vnd.ipld.car](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.car).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The payload is a small subset of the [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#response-payload) specification in that it only ever returns an arbitrary DAG as a verifiable CAR stream, see [application/vnd.ipld.car](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.car).
```

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#accept-ranges-response-header), but only ever returns with `none` as range requests are not currently supported.

### `Cache-Control` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#cache-control-response-header), but only ever returns `immutable` since this API only supports the `/ipfs/` namespace.

- `Cache-Control: public, max-age=29030400, immutable`

### `Content-Disposition` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#content-disposition-response-header), but only ever returns as an `attachment`, using the given `filename` query parameter if provided, or if no `filename` query parameter is provided, uses the requested CID with a `.car` extension.

- `Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=bafy...foo.car`

### `Content-Type` (response header)

Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#content-type-response-header), but only ever returns the CAR content type.

- `Content-Type: application/vnd.ipld.car; version=1`

### `Etag` (response header)

> Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#etag-response-header), but returns a quoted string of the format `"<cid>.car.<hash>"`, with hash being a 32-bit string based on the requested CID string and the `dag-scope` query parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same as [Path Gateway](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/path-gateway/#etag-response-header), but returns a quoted string of the format `"<cid>.car.<hash>"`, with hash being a 32-bit string based on the elements of the request that determine the uniqueness of the response; including the CID, path, `dag-scope` query parameter and `dups` specifier in the `Accept` header.
```

Author: Appreciate it sir
